docs/auth.md, before:

# Authentication and User Flow Documentation

This document explains how **Login**, **Registration**, and **Frontend Access Control** work in the system using a single route (`/check-user`). It also covers the migration to **session cookies** for authentication and the use of **Next.js middleware** for route-level access control.

---

## 🔑 Authentication Flow

### 1. Login with Google
- User clicks **Login** button.
- They can log in using **Sign in with Google** (Firebase handles authentication).
- On successful login, Firebase returns an **ID token**.
- The token is sent to backend (`/check-user`) for verification.
- Upon successful verification, a **session cookie** is set in the response (valid for 14 days).
- Client stores user profile in localStorage as `hh_user` for displaying user info (e.g., name, role).

### 2. Dual-Mode `/check-user` Endpoint
The `/check-user` route handles **both login and registration** depending on the request body. It requires `Authorization: Bearer <id_token>`.

#### **Login Check Mode**
- **Request**: `POST /check-user` with **no body** (or empty body).
- Backend verifies Firebase ID token and checks DB:
  - ✅ If user exists → returns `200 OK` with user details and sets session cookie.
  - ❌ If user does not exist → returns `404 User is not registered`.

#### **Registration Mode**
- **Request**: `POST /check-user` with JSON body containing:
```json
{
  "role": "HR or Recruiter",
  "company_name": "Some Company"
}
```
- Registration requires **role** and **company_name**.
- Upon success, sets Firebase custom claims and session cookie.

### 3. Logout
- **Request**: `POST /session-logout` (no body required).
- Clears the session cookie by setting an expired cookie.
- Client removes `hh_user` from localStorage.
- Response: `200 OK` with message "Logged out".

---

## 🏢 Registration Rules

### HR Registration
- Allowed **only if the company does NOT already exist** in DB.
- Creates a new user with role = `HR`.
- Sets Firebase custom claims: `{ role: "HR", company: company_name }`.
- Response: `201 Created` with user details and session cookie.

### Recruiter Registration
- Allowed **only if the company already exists** in DB (created by HR).
- Creates a new user with role = `Recruiter` and assigns to that company.
- Sets Firebase custom claims: `{ role: "Recruiter", company: company_name }`.
- Response: `201 Created` with user details and session cookie.

### Invalid Role
- If role is not `HR` or `Recruiter` → returns `400 Bad Request`.

---

## 🔑 Frontend Access Control (Next.js Middleware)
- Middleware runs on **all `/` and `/workspace/*` routes**.
- Reads the **session cookie (HttpOnly)** and decodes the role to determine which pages a user can access.

### Rules Implemented:
1. **Logged-out users**: cannot access `/workspace/*`, always redirected to `/`.
2. **Logged-in users**:
   - Visiting `/` → redirected to their workspace based on role (`/workspace/hr` or `/workspace/recruiter`).
   - Visiting the **wrong workspace** → redirected to their correct workspace.
3. **Landing page (`/`)** is accessible only to logged-out users. Logged-in users trying to access `/` are automatically redirected to their workspace.

**Note:** Middleware **decodes the cookie for UX purposes** (redirects), but the backend **still validates the cookie** for all API calls. Middleware does not replace backend security.

---

## 🔄 Summary of Flow
1. User clicks login/register on landing page (`/`).
2. Backend verifies Firebase ID token via `/check-user` and sets session cookie.
3. Middleware:
   - Redirects logged-in users away from `/` to their workspace.
   - Blocks access to other roles’ workspace pages.
4. User can only access pages relevant to their role:
   - HR → `/workspace/hr`
   - Recruiter → `/workspace/recruiter`
5. Logout clears the session cookie and removes `hh_user` from localStorage. Middleware redirects them back to `/`.

---

## 📊 Example Requests

### Login (Check User)
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```
**Response (200 OK):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "User exists",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "John Doe",
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "role": "Recruiter",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

**Response (404 Not Found):**
```json
{ "detail": "User is not registered" }
```

---

### Register HR
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "role": "HR",
  "company_name": "Acme Corp"
}
```
**Response (201 Created):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "HR user created successfully",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "Alice HR",
    "email": "alice@example.com",
    "role": "HR",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

---

### Register Recruiter
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "role": "Recruiter",
  "company_name": "Acme Corp"
}
```
**Response (201 Created):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "Recruiter user created successfully",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "Bob Recruiter",
    "email": "bob@example.com",
    "role": "Recruiter",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

---

### Logout
```http
POST /session-logout
```
**Response (200 OK):** (Clears `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "Logged out"
}
```

---

## ✅ Key Points
- **Single route** for login and registration → `/check-user`.
- **Session cookies** replace bearer tokens; do **not store ID tokens in localStorage**.
- Client stores **only the user profile** (`hh_user`) in localStorage for UI display.
- Middleware ensures **role-based frontend access**:
  - Logged-in users are redirected to their workspace.
  - Users cannot access workspaces not assigned to their role.
  - Landing page `/` is only for logged-out users.
- Backend **remains the final authority** for data access.

Commit message:

docs(auth): update registration flow with company creation logic

docs/auth.md, after:

# Authentication and User Flow Documentation

This document explains how **Login**, **Registration**, and **Frontend Access Control** work in the system using a single route (`/check-user`). It also covers the migration to **session cookies** for authentication and the use of **Next.js middleware** for route-level access control.

---

## 🔑 Authentication Flow

> **Note:** the backend now stores `Company` in its own `companies` table. Users are linked to a company via `users.company_id`. HR users are recorded as the company's HR via `companies.hr_user_id` (nullable during creation flow). The `/check-user` flow uses these tables when deciding registration/login behavior.

### 1. Login with Google
- User clicks **Login** button.
- They can log in using **Sign in with Google** (Firebase handles authentication).
- On successful login, Firebase returns an **ID token**.
- The token is sent to backend (`/check-user`) for verification.
- Upon successful verification, a **session cookie** is set in the response (valid for 14 days).
- Client stores user profile in localStorage as `hh_user` for displaying user info (e.g., name, role).

### 2. Dual-Mode `/check-user` Endpoint
The `/check-user` route handles **both login and registration** depending on the request body. It requires `Authorization: Bearer <id_token>`.

#### **Login Check Mode**
- **Request**: `POST /check-user` with **no body** (or empty body).
- Backend verifies Firebase ID token and checks DB:
  - ✅ If user exists → returns `200 OK` with user details and sets session cookie. The `company_name` in the response is derived from the related `companies` row (if present).
  - ❌ If user does not exist → returns `404 User is not registered`.

#### **Registration Mode**
- **Request**: `POST /check-user` with JSON body containing:
```json
{
  "role": "HR or Recruiter",
  "company_name": "Some Company"
}
```
- Registration requires **role** and **company_name**.
- Upon success, sets Firebase custom claims and session cookie.

> **Implementation detail (how registration uses DB tables):**
> - **HR registration**: backend will create the `User` with role `HR` and create a new `Company` row linked to that user (company name stored in `companies.name` and the HR `User` linked via `companies.hr_user_id` and `users.company_id`). HR registration is allowed only if the company does not already exist.
> - **Recruiter registration**: backend will look up the `Company` by name and create a `User` with role `Recruiter` linked to that company via `users.company_id`. Recruiter registration is allowed only if the company already exists.

### 3. Logout
- **Request**: `POST /session-logout` (no body required).
- Clears the session cookie by setting an expired cookie.
- Client removes `hh_user` from localStorage.
- Response: `200 OK` with message "Logged out".

---

## 🏢 Registration Rules

### HR Registration
- Allowed **only if the company does NOT already exist** in DB.
- Creates a new user with role = `HR` and creates a `Company` row linked to that HR user.
- Sets Firebase custom claims: `{ role: "HR", company: company_name }`.
- Response: `201 Created` with user details and session cookie.

### Recruiter Registration
- Allowed **only if the company already exists** in DB (created by HR).
- Creates a new user with role = `Recruiter` and assigns to that company (`users.company_id`).
- Sets Firebase custom claims: `{ role: "Recruiter", company: company_name }`.
- Response: `201 Created` with user details and session cookie.

### Invalid Role
- If role is not `HR` or `Recruiter` → returns `400 Bad Request`.

---

## 🔑 Frontend Access Control (Next.js Middleware)
- Middleware runs on **all `/` and `/workspace/*` routes**.
- Reads the **session cookie (HttpOnly)** and decodes the role to determine which pages a user can access.

### Rules Implemented:
1. **Logged-out users**: cannot access `/workspace/*`, always redirected to `/`.
2. **Logged-in users**:
   - Visiting `/` → redirected to their workspace based on role (`/workspace/hr` or `/workspace/recruiter`).
   - Visiting the **wrong workspace** → redirected to their correct workspace.
3. **Landing page (`/`)** is accessible only to logged-out users. Logged-in users trying to access `/` are automatically redirected to their workspace.

**Note:** Middleware **decodes the cookie for UX purposes** (redirects), but the backend **still validates the cookie** for all API calls. Middleware does not replace backend security.

---

## 🔄 Summary of Flow
1. User clicks login/register on landing page (`/`).
2. Backend verifies Firebase ID token via `/check-user` and sets session cookie.
3. Middleware:
   - Redirects logged-in users away from `/` to their workspace.
   - Blocks access to other roles’ workspace pages.
4. User can only access pages relevant to their role:
   - HR → `/workspace/hr`
   - Recruiter → `/workspace/recruiter`
5. Logout clears the session cookie and removes `hh_user` from localStorage. Middleware redirects them back to `/`.

---

## 📊 Example Requests

### Login (Check User)
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{}
```
**Response (200 OK):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "User exists",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "John Doe",
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "role": "Recruiter",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

**Response (404 Not Found):**
```json
{ "detail": "User is not registered" }
```

---

### Register HR
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "role": "HR",
  "company_name": "Acme Corp"
}
```
**Response (201 Created):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "HR user created successfully",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "Alice HR",
    "email": "alice@example.com",
    "role": "HR",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

---

### Register Recruiter
```http
POST /check-user
Authorization: Bearer <firebase_id_token>
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "role": "Recruiter",
  "company_name": "Acme Corp"
}
```
**Response (201 Created):** (Sets `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "Recruiter user created successfully",
  "user": {
    "uid": "firebase_uid",
    "name": "Bob Recruiter",
    "email": "bob@example.com",
    "role": "Recruiter",
    "company_name": "Acme Corp"
  }
}
```

---

### Logout
```http
POST /session-logout
```
**Response (200 OK):** (Clears `session` cookie)
```json
{
  "message": "Logged out"
}
```

---

## ✅ Key Points
- **Single route** for login and registration → `/check-user`.
- **Session cookies** replace bearer tokens; do **not store ID tokens in localStorage**.
- Client stores **only the user profile** (`hh_user`) in localStorage for UI display.
- Middleware ensures **role-based frontend access**:
  - Logged-in users are redirected to their workspace.
  - Users cannot access workspaces not assigned to their role.
  - Landing page `/` is only for logged-out users.
- Backend **remains the final authority** for data access.
